# Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. 
The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. 
As a data engineer 
- we have to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app and 
- then to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis.\
 
To do this , I have to create 

- Database schema 
- ETL pipeline for this analysis

# Database Schema

Using the song and log datasets, star schema needs to created to optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

## Fact Table
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
   - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
## Dimension Tables
1. users - users in the app
   - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2. songs - songs in music database
   - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3. artists - artists in music database
   - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
4. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
   
# ETL pipeline

## Dataset
1. Song Dataset: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID
2. Log Dataset: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. 

## ETL Steps

 etl.py reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables.
 Following steps are done here :-
 
 - It reads data  from the JSON song files, data/song_data and populate the songs and artists tables with . 
 - It reads from the JSON log files, data/log_data, and populate time and users tables. 
 - it selects data from  song and artist id from the songs and artists tables and do the join with log file  to populate the songplays fact table.
 
## Sample Query 

The sample query is there in the test.ipynb file. Please check it.
 
# Project Instructions

1. Clone the repository and navigate to the downloaded folder.

```
git clone git@github.com:op317q/postgres-data-modeling.git
cd postgres-data-modeling
```

2. Create and activate a new environment.

```
conda create -n postgres-data-modeling python=3.6
source activate postgres-data-modeling

```

3. install python package. 
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. run the postgres DB in local.
```
docker-compose up
```

5. run python create_tables.py to create all the tables

6. To run the Jupyter Notebook

```
jupyter notebook test.ipynb

jupyter notebook etl.ipynb
```

